project_tidydata CodeBook.md
============================

Coursera - Data Science Track - Getting and Cleaning Data - course project

The purpose of this CodeBook is to describe the variables, the data, and any transformations or work performed
to clean up the data which culminates in the final tidy data set saved in "tidy_data_by_JXieDS.txt".

R script called run_analysis.R that does the following (when run with the data sets saved in the ./data subdirectory),
   1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
   2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
   3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set.
   4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
   5. From the above data set, creates a tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity (6 activities) and each subject (30 subjects).

The actual tasks are performed in the following stages, highlighted by associated variable names,
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stage 1. Read in data

	labels (6x2): numeric "activity_label" and descriptive "activity" names.
	features (561x2): numeric identifiers and the feature variable names. 
	*	Note: Features are the variables of the sensor signals generated by accelerometer and gyroscope in the Smartphones carried by the test volunteers.)

	subject_train (7352x1): the identifiers of the training set
	X_train (7352x561): Sensor data
	y_train (7352x1): Activity labels derived from Sensor data
	
	subject_test (2947x1): the identifiers of the test set
	X_test (2947x561): Sensor data
	y_test (2947x1): Activity labels derived from Sensor data

Stage 2. Merge and filter data

	subjects (10299x1): the identifiers of the full data set including subject_train and subject_test
	X_data (10299x561): full set of Sensor data
	y_data (10299x1): full set of activity labels derived from Sensor data

    X_data_mean (10299x53): selected variables with mean values. Here we try to include all cases of "mean".
    X_data_std (10299x33): selected variables with standard deviation values.
    X_data_select (10299x86): combined mean and std sets selected.

	project_dataset (10299x88): merged data set including subject identifiers and selected Sensor data.
    project_dataset_labels (10299x89): selected data set with descriptive "activity" names. 
	*	Note: The numeric activity labels are kept for easy reference.
	
Stage 3. Creates a tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject

	project_dataset_DT (10299x89): data.table (converted from data.frame) for subsequent lapply operation.
	tidy_DT (180x89): tidy data set with the mean values of each activity (of 6) and each subject (of 30). 

A file containing the tidy data set has been submitted directly to Coursera course project page.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The .txt file can be read with the R code below.

    tidy_data <- read.table("tidy_data_by_JXieDS.txt", header = TRUE)

This tidy data set that meets the tidy data principles, e.g., each variable measured should be in one column and each different observation of that variable should be in a different row.
The numeric activity_labels are kept along with the descriptive activity names since the numeric labels could serve as a reference to the original data sets.  